13/WAKU2-STORE: Adds content filter and some general specs revisions (#344)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/13/README.md

  - Oskar Thorén <oskar@status.im>
---

> This specification explains the Waku `WAKU2-STORE` protocol which enables querying of messages received through relay protocol and stored by other nodes. 

Reviewer: I'd prepend as `13/WAKU-STORE` to make it clearer that it is referring to that unique ID

Author: Sure, addressed. Updated it in the entire specs.

It also supports pagination for more efficient querying of historical messages. 

**Protocol identifier***: `/vac/waku/store/2.0.0-beta2`

# Design Requirements

> Nodes willing to provide storage service in `WAKU2-STORE` protocol SHOULD be able to provide the complete and intact view of message history. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nodes willing to provide storage service using `WAKU2-STORE` protocol SHOULD provide a complete and full view of message history.
```

Reviewer: "be able to" sounds like too much hedging, roundabout

As such, they are required to be *highly available* and in specific have a *high uptime* to consistently receive and store network messages. 
The high uptime requirement makes sure that no message is missed out hence a complete and intact view of the message history is delivered to the querying nodes.
Nevertheless, in case that storage provider nodes cannot afford high availability, the querying nodes may retrieve the historical messages from multiple sources to achieve a full and intact view of the past.

# Security Consideration

> The main security consideration to be taken into account while using `WAKU2-STORE` is to notice that the querying nodes have to reveal their content filters of interest to the queried nodes hence compromising their privacy. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The main security consideration to take into account while using `WAKU2-STORE` is that a querying node have to reveal their content filters of interest to the queried node, hence potentially compromising their privacy.
```

## Terminology
The term Personally identifiable information (PII) refers to any piece of data that can be used to uniquely identify a user. 
For example, the signature verification key, and the hash of one's static IP address are unique for each user and hence count as PII.

# Adversarial Model

> Any peer running the `WAKU2-STORE` protocol i.e., both the querying node and the queried node are considered as an adversary. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any peer running the `WAKU2-STORE` protocol, i.e. both the querying node and the queried node, are considered as an adversary. 
```

  - Oskar Thorén <oskar@status.im>
---

> This specification explains the Waku `WakuStore` protocol which enables querying of messages received through relay protocol and stored by other nodes. 

Reviewer 2: Not specific to this change but it'd be good to settle for one terminology between:
- waku2-store
- waku v2 store
- waku store
- wakustore

Author: Sure! will do that.

Author: addressed

It also supports pagination for more efficient querying of historical messages. 

**Protocol identifier***: `/vac/waku/store/2.0.0-beta2`

# Design Requirements
Nodes willing to provide storage service in `WakuStore` protocol are required to be *highly available* and in specific have a *high uptime* to consistently receive and store network messages. 

> The high uptime requirement makes sure that no message is missed out hence a complete and intact view of the message history is delivered to the querying nodes.

Reviewer 2: Maybe one important point considering the (decentralised) ecosystem we are operating in is that ONE store server must/should be able to provide the complete and intact view.
I think it's implied in the next sentence but it might be worth mentioning.

I can easily see a new protocol in the feature where each individual node cache some messages for other and reduce the need of waku store.

Author: Addressed!

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I think I am missing it, how did you address it? Ok not to address it.

Reviewer: Line 18, above

Author: > Sorry, I think I am missing it, how did you address it? Ok not to address it.

@D4nte 
As Oskar also mentioned, I have applied your comment in line 18.

Nevertheless, in case that storage provider nodes cannot afford high availability, the querying nodes may retrieve the historical messages from multiple sources to achieve a full and intact view of the past.

# Security Consideration
The main security consideration to be taken into account while using `WakuStore` is to notice that the querying nodes have to reveal their content filters of interest to the queried nodes hence compromising their privacy. 

## Terminology
The term Personally identifiable information (PII) refers to any piece of data that can be used to uniquely identify a user. 
For example, the signature verification key, and the hash of one's static IP address are unique for each user and hence count as PII.

# Adversarial Model
Any peer running the `WakuStore` protocol i.e., both the querying node and the queried node are considered as an adversary. 

> Furthermore, we consider the adversary as a passive entity that attempts to collect information from other peers to conduct an attack but it does so without violating protocol definitions and instructions. 

Reviewer 2: As I got confused when first readinf the spec, I think it may be worth mentioning that the stated adversarial model is the one we are considering today and we intend to evolve it in the future. Something like:

```suggestion
Furthermore, we currently consider the adversary as a passive entity that attempts to collect information from other peers to conduct an attack but it does so without violating protocol definitions and instructions. 
```
and also add:

```
As we evolve the protocol, further adversarial models will be considered.
```

Author: Sure, addressed.

  Direction direction = 3;
}

message HistoryContentFilter {

>   string contentTopic = 1;

Reviewer 2: nitpick: use snake_case for field names: https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/docs/style

However, we use camelCase everywhere so maybe best to change all or nothing.

Author: Thanks! you are right! to make sure that all the specs follow the same convention,  I will open an issue re this and to inform everyone about this potential shift.

Author: done https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc/issues/346

}

message HistoryQuery {

>   repeated HistoryContentFilter contentFilters = 2;

Reviewer 2: Some of the types are prefixed with `History` and some are not (`PagingInfo`), what is the reasoning here?

Author: I am not sure about the exact reason but to my understanding, since the `Request`s and `RPC`s message names are shared with the filter protocol, the `History` prefix (and similarly the `Filter` prefix) would disambiguate the usage.  The same applies to the `ContentFilter` which is used with a similar name in the filter protocol.
However, `PagingInfo` is only used in the store protocol so is not prefixed.

Do you have any suggestion re this? let me know!

Reviewer 2: Sounds reasonable 👍

>   PagingInfo pagingInfo = 3; // used for pagination

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  PagingInfo pagingInfo = 3;
```

I know the comment was previously present but it does not add any value.

- `cursor`: holds the `Index` of a `WakuMessage`.
- `direction`: indicates the direction of paging which can be either `FORWARD` or `BACKWARD`.

### HistoryContentFilter
`HistoryContentFilter` carries the information required for filtering historical messages. 
- `contentTopic` represents the content topic of the queried historical Waku messages.

>   This field maps to the `contentTopic` field of the [14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](/spec/14).
> ### HistoryQuery

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  This field maps to the `contentTopic` field of the [14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](/spec/14).
  
### HistoryQuery
```

nitpick

  <!-- TODO: if nodes have to disclose their PeerIDs (e.g., for authentication purposes) when connecting to other nodes in the store protocol, then Tor does not preserve anonymity since it only helps in hiding the IP. So, the PeerId usage in switches must be investigated further. Depending on how PeerId is used, one may be able to link between a querying node and its queried topics despite hiding the IP address--> 
  - By deploying secure 2-party computations in which the querying node obtains the historical messages of a certain topic whereas the queried node learns nothing about the query. 
  Examples of such 2PC protocols are secure one-way Private Set Intersections (PSI). 
  <!-- TODO: add a reference for PSIs? --> <!-- TODO: more techniques to be included --> 
<!-- TODO: Censorship resistant: this is about a node that hides the historical messages from other nodes. This attack is not included in the specs since it does not fit the passive adversarial model (the attacker needs to deviate from the store protocol).-->

# Changelog

### Next 
- Added the initial threat model and security analysis.

> - Replaced the `topics` field of `HistoryQuery` with a newly defined message type `HistoryContentFilter`.

Reviewer 2: Here is a changelog guideline that I highly recommend to help with consistency across the code base https://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/

Author: Great, thanks!

Author: Addressed.

  <!-- TODO: if nodes have to disclose their PeerIDs (e.g., for authentication purposes) when connecting to other nodes in the store protocol, then Tor does not preserve anonymity since it only helps in hiding the IP. So, the PeerId usage in switches must be investigated further. Depending on how PeerId is used, one may be able to link between a querying node and its queried topics despite hiding the IP address--> 
  - By deploying secure 2-party computations in which the querying node obtains the historical messages of a certain topic whereas the queried node learns nothing about the query. 
  Examples of such 2PC protocols are secure one-way Private Set Intersections (PSI). 
  <!-- TODO: add a reference for PSIs? --> <!-- TODO: more techniques to be included --> 
<!-- TODO: Censorship resistant: this is about a node that hides the historical messages from other nodes. This attack is not included in the specs since it does not fit the passive adversarial model (the attacker needs to deviate from the store protocol).-->

# Changelog

> ## Next 

Reviewer: Can get rid of changelog with simplified lifecycle as this spec is in draft mode

Author: Can you please elaborate on "with simplified lifecycle", Shall I change the title from "Changelog" to "Lifecycle"?

Reviewer: I mean when we move to rfc.vac.dev and https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/1/ a spec being in raw/draft/stable is basically all one needs to know. For draft, quick changes are fine. So we don't need the changelog at all and this section can be removed. If we really need to figure out some historical stuff we can just look in git history. This reduces overhead.

Author: Thanks for the explanation. Will remove the section.
